Author: Matt Haig
Detailed Summary

An alien is sent to Earth to take over Cambridge professor Andrew Martin’s life when he solves Riemann’s hypothesis. The alien has to destroy all information related to the solution and kill anyone involved. The alien (whom I’ll call Andrew now) arrives on Earth and is naked. He walks around like that for a while until he’s caught by the police and taken to a mental hospital. Andrew’s wife, Isobel, comes to take him home and looks after him. She’s a renown historian. Their marriage is cracking but since Andrew doesn’t have any of his actual memories, he doesn’t really understand anything. He befriends the pet dog, Newton, and tries to figure out who knows what about the solution. The dean of mathematics (or something) was given the proof so Andrew kills him by making him have a heart attack. His alien friends tell him to kill Isobel and Gulliver (Andrew’s son) but Andrew has fallen in love with Isobel and developed a fondness for Gulliver. He saves Gulliver when he’s about to commit suicide. Andrew has an affair with one of his students named Maggie. He tells Isobel about it and she tells him to leave the house and never come back. A drunkard on the bench tells Andrew he had seen him earlier. Andrew realises another alien has been sent to finish his mission so he sneaks back into the house and finds the second Andrew. He tricks the second Andrew into getting Gulliver to kill himself (when the boy comes home) and then, at the last second, Andrew and Gulliver overpower the alien. Andrew makes the alien contact the other aliens and tell them his mission is complete and then kills him. Andrew puts his hand on the stove to burn the communications stuff. He tells Isobel and Gulliver the truth about being an alien and leaves to become a mathematics professor at Stanford (after typing a list of one hundred things for Gulliver to read). He returns to Cambridge for some lectures or something and meets Gulliver who tells him that Isobel might be missing him.

Plot and Pacing

I wasn’t quite ready to start the last Witcher book so I figured I’d take another book break. I was familiar with Matt Haig’s work–I’ve read his Reasons to Survive–so I had high hopes. I wouldn’t say the book sucked but I guess I wasn’t really in the right mood for it. I enjoyed the alien storyline. It was hilarious and poked fun at how weird human beings are. What I didn’t like was the sentimental bits of what it means to be human and how life is meaningful and emotions are important. It felt quite cheesy and rather than forming a cohesive narrative, I felt as though I was going through an Instagram or Tumblr feed with uplifting quotes. Also, I guess the plot was pretty predictable. I knew alien Andrew would want to stay on Earth.

Characters

Andrew Martin, frankly, became boring after he fully committed to being a human. I felt bad for Isobel because she felt she was taken for granted by Andrew (the old one). She essentially gave up her career to stay at home. Gulliver was interesting too. I liked how he felt pressured to live up to his father’s achievements. I mean, I didn’t like it but I thought it gave him a lot of depth. And eating cereal for breakfast, lunch and dinner is relatable as hell. 🙂 But my favourite was Newton because doggos are adorable.

Writing Style

It was just overly sentimental. Beneath my rough exterior, I am a romantic at heart but I didn’t want to read more about why humans are awesome and super deep because, honestly, I really don’t think we are that great. The humour, after a third of the book, felt forced. I kept getting the sense that Haig was trying too hard to make these grand observations about human nature but they all fell flat and were not so much grand as superficial.
